B-spline surface {#bsurf}
=========================

# Control net

The following figure illustrates the indexation of a control
net for a B-surface \f$\textbf{s}(u,v)\f$:

\image html bsurf-control-net.png
\image latex bsurf-control-net.png

Internally, the control net is organized as a matrix represented by two nested
standard C++ vectors (std::vector). The rows of this matrix correspond to
isovalues in U direction. The cols in this matrix correspond to the isovalues
in V direction.

# Point inversion

\image html bsurf-invert-point.png Schematical view of point inversion process.
\image latex bsurf-invert-point.png Schematical view of point inversion process.

Point inversion is a fundamental algorithm which allows obtaining a preimage
of a 3D point in the parametric domain of a surface. In essence, point inversion
is equivalent to point projection. The mathematical formulation of the point
inversion problem is given in \ref piegl-tiller-1995 "The NURBS Book". The following
picture illustrates the poles of a control net projected to the B-surface using
the point inversion technique (the projected points are denoted with green color).

\image html bsurf-invert-poles.png Point inversion for B-surface poles.
\image latex bsurf-invert-poles.png Point inversion for B-surface poles.

There are some important notes on the proper implementation of the Newton iterations
for point inversion.

- The search space should be constrained with `U_min`, `U_max`, `V_min` and `V_max`
  extremities of a B-surface. If the next test point of the Newton iteration falls
  outside the domain, the corresponding coordinate is normally snapped to its extremity.
  However, snapping the points during the Newton iterations may lead to the
  divergence of the optimization. If so, it may help to let the
  Newton iterations sample the objective function out of its domain. Such out-of-domain
  sampling is not prohibited for the B-spline surface even though the natural
  extrapolation rarely gives any meaningful shape.

\image html bsurf-invert-point-nonort.png Non-orthogonal projection result.
\image latex bsurf-invert-point-nonort.png Non-orthogonal projection result.

- If the search space is constrained as mentioned above, then the objective
  functions are often non-minimizable because they express the cosine whose
  values are sometimes geometrically restricted from being zeros (think of a border point
  whose projection cannot be orthogonal). In such cases, the algorithm
  cannot converge to an unconstrained minimum. Therefore, the stop criterion to
  use is not only the value of a function (which should ideally become zero) but also the
  step size in the search space.

\image html bsurf-invert-poles-problem2.png Unexpected but formally correct solution.
\image latex bsurf-invert-poles-problem2.png Unexpected but formally correct solution.

- The Newton iterations perform the local search. Therefore, it is necessary
  to properly choose the initial guess. If the point inversion process always
  starts from a randomly picked point (e.g., the simplest way of choosing the
  initial guess is to pick up the midpoint of the surface in its domain), the
  local search may take the solution far from the desired one. In the worst case,
  it may even diverge. An example of a formally correct but unsuitable solution
  of point inversion is shown in the figure above. Intuitively, we expect the
  projected point to lie as close to the origin point as possible.
  To fit this requirement, the local search should be accompanied by a wise global search.
  Fortunately, for B-spline surfaces, the global search is quite straightforward. It
  may consist in picking up the control pole closest to the point being inverted
  and taking the midpoint of its support subdomain (whose size is dependent on
  the spline degrees).

\image html bsurf-invert-point-subdomain.png Subdomain for choosing the initial guess.
\image latex bsurf-invert-point-subdomain.png Subdomain for choosing the initial guess.

The point inversion algorithm is implemented in mobius::geom_BSplineSurface
class. It has two phases:

- The first attempt to invert the point is done with the automatic snapping of the
  sampling coordinates to the surface limits. If this phase succeeds, the algorithm halts.

\image html bsurf-invert-point-divergency.png Snapping technique leads to non-convergence.
\image latex bsurf-invert-point-divergency.png Snapping technique leads to non-convergence.

- If the previous attempt fails, the Newton iterations are performed without
  intermediate snapping to let the optimizer find its way out of the surface domain.

\image html bsurf-invert-point-divergency-sol.png Letting the optimizer go outside the surface domain.
\image latex bsurf-invert-point-divergency-sol.png Letting the optimizer go outside the surface domain.

# JSON dump

Mobius supports kernel-agnostic JSON-representations of B-surfaces. You can
obtain these dumps from \ref asitus2017 "Analysis Situs" interactively or
specify geometry manually (like this is done in mobius::test_BSplineSurface test
functions).

```
{
    entity: surface,
    type: b-surface,
    continuity: CN,
    domain: {
        U_min: 0,
        U_max: 10,
        V_min: -10,
        V_max: 0
    },
    flags: {
        is_U_rational: 0,
        is_V_rational: 0,
        is_U_periodic: 0,
        is_V_periodic: 0,
        is_U_closed: 0,
        is_V_closed: 0
    },
    properties: {
        U_degree: 1,
        V_degree: 1,
        U_knots: [0, 0, 10, 10],
        V_knots: [-10, -10, 0, 0],
        num_poles_in_U_axis: 2,
        num_poles_in_V_axis: 2,
        poles: {
            u0: [[0, 10, 0], [0, 0, 0]],
            u1: [[0, 10, 10], [0, 0, 10]]
        }
    }
}
```
